Welcome to this course on Python for Data Science. This is a 4 week course where we are
going to teach you some very basic programming aspects in Python. And since this is a course
that is geared towards data science, towards end of the course based on what has been taught
in the course, we will also show you two different case studies. One is what we call as a function
approximation case study, another one a classification case study and then tell you how to solve those
case studies using the programming platform that you have learned. So, in this first introductory
lecture, I am just going to talk about why are we looking at Python for data science. So,
to look at that first, we are going to look at what data science is. This is something that you
would have seen in other videos of courses in NPTEL and other places. Data science is basically the
science of analyzing raw data and deriving insights from this data. And you could use multiple
techniques to derive insights, you could use simple statistical techniques to derive insights,
you could use more complicated and more sophisticated machine learning techniques to derive insights
and so on. Nonetheless, the key focus of data science is in actually deriving these insights using
whatever techniques that you want to use. Now, there is lot of excitement about data science and
this excitement comes because it is been shown that you can get very valuable insights from large
data and you can get insights about how different variables change together, how one variable affects
another variable and so on with large data which is not very easy to simply see by very simple
computation. So, you need to inverse some time and energy into understanding how you could look at
this data and derive these insights from data. And from utilitarian viewpoint, if you look at
data science in industries, if you do proper data science, it allows these industries to make better
decisions. These decisions could be in multiple fields. For example, companies could make better
purchasing decisions, better hiring decisions, better decisions in terms of how to operate their
processes and so on. So, when we talk about decisions, the decisions could be across multiple
verticals in an industry. And data science is not only useful from an industrial perspective,
it is also useful in natural sciences themselves. So, where you look at lots of data to model your
system or test your hypotheses or theories about systems and so on. So, when we talk about data
science, we start by assuming that we have a large amount of data for the problem of interest.
And we are going to basically look at this data, we are going to inspect the data, we are going to
clean and curate the data, then we will do some transformation of the data modeling and so on.
Before we can derive insights that are valuable to the organization or to test a theory and so on.
Now, coming to a more practical view point of what we do once we have data, I have these four
bullet points which roughly tell you supposing you were solving a data science problem.
What are the steps you will do? So, you will start with just having data, someone gives you data.
And you are trying to derive insights from this data. So, the very first step is really to bring
this data into your system. So, you have to read the data so that the data comes into this programming
platform so that you can use this data. Now, data could be in multiple formats. So, you could
have data in a simple excel sheet or some other format. So, we will teach you how to pull data
in to your programming platform from multiple data formats. So, that is the first step really if you
think about how you are going to solve a problem. The steps would be first to simply read the data.
And then once you read the data many times you have to do some processing with this data.
You could have data that is not correct. For example, we all know that if you have your mobile
numbers there are 10 numbers in a mobile number and if there is a column of mobile numbers and then
say there is a one row where there are just five numbers then you know there is something wrong.
So, this is a very simple check I am talking about in real data processing this gets much more
complicated. So, once you bring the data in when you try to process this data you are going to get
errors such as this. So, how do you remove such errors? How do you clean the data is one activity
that that usually precedes doing you more useful stuff with the data.
This is not the only issue that we look at there could be data that is missing. So, for example,
there is a variable for which you get a value in multiple situations but in some situations the
value is missing. So, what do you do with this data? Do you throw the record away or you do something
to fill the data and so on. So, these are all data processing cleaning steps. So, in this course
we will tell you the tools that are available in Python so that you can do this data processing
cleaning and so on. Now, what you have done at this point is you have been able to get the data
into the system. You have been able to process and clean the data and get to a certain data file
or data structure that is reasonably complete. So, that you think you can work with this data set
at which point what you will do is you will try to summarize this data and usually summarization
of this data very simple technique would be very very simple statistical measures that you will
compute. You could for example, compute a median mode mean of a particular column. So, those are
simple ideas of summarizing the data you could compute variance and so on. So, we are going to
teach you how to use this notions of statistical quantities that you can use to summarize the data.
Once you summarize the data then another activity which is usually taken up is what is called
visualization right. So, visualization means you look at this data more pictorially to get insights
about the data before you bring in heavy duty algorithms to bear on this data.
And this is a creative aspect of data science. The same data could be visualized by multiple people
in multiple ways and some visualizations are not only eye catching but are also much more
informative than other types of visualization. So, this notion of plotting this data so that
some of the attributes or aspects of the data are made apparent is this notion of visualization.
And there are tools in Python that will teach you in terms of how you visualize this data.
So, at this point you have taken the data you have cleaned the data got a set of data points or
data structure that you can work with. You have done some basic summary of this data that
gives you some insights. You also looked at it more visually and you have got some more insights
but when you have large amount of data big data the last step is really deriving those insights
which are not readily apparent either through visualization or through simple summary of data.
So, how do we then go and look at more sophisticated analytics or analysis of data so that these
insights come out and that is where machine learning comes. And as a part of this course
when you see the progress of this course you will notice that you will go through all of this
so that you are ready to look at data science problems in a structured format and then use Python
as a tool to solve some of these problems. Now, why Python for doing all of this the number one
reason is that there are the Python libraries which already are geared towards doing many of the
things that we talked about so that it becomes easy for one to program and very quickly you can get
some interesting outcomes out of what we are trying to do. So, there are as we talked about in
the previous slide you need to do data manipulation and preprocessing. There are lots of functions
libraries in Python where you can do data wrangling manipulation and so on. From a data summary view
point there are many of these statistical calculations that you want to do are already pre-programmed
and you have to simply invoke them with your data to be able to show data summary.
The next step we talked about visualization there are libraries in Python which can be used
to do the visualization and finally for the more sophisticated analysis that we talked about
all kinds of machine learning algorithms are already pre coded available as libraries in Python.
So, again once you understand some bit about these functions and once you get comfortable working
in Python then applying certain machine learning algorithms for these problems become trivial.
You simply call these libraries and then run these algorithms.
At a higher level so in the previous slide we talked about flow process for how I get the data
in clean and all the way up to insights and then parallelly we said why Python makes it easy for us
to do all of this. If you go forward a little more and then ask in terms of the other
advantages of Python which are little more than just very simple data science activities.
Python provides you several libraries and it is being continuously improved so anytime there is
any algorithm those are coming into the set of libraries. So, in that sense it is very varied
and there is also a good user community so if there are some issues with new libraries and so on
those are fixed so that you get robust library to work with and we talk about data and data can
be of different scales so the examples.
